bitcoin: add bitcoin docs (WIP) (#270)
ipld/specs: block-layer/codecs/bitcoin.md

# Specification: Bitcoin

**Status: Descriptive - Final**

This specification describes the method for representing the Bitcoin blockchain with IPLD. This specification _does not_ describe a flexible method for representing arbitrary data and the Bitcoin format _does not_ support the full ["IPLD Data Model."](../../data-model-layer/data-model.md). Rather, this specification is primarily for the purpose of representing Bitcoin data and interacting with it via IPLD tools and linking mechanisms.

## Bitcoin as a Content Addressed Format

### Terminology

> By definition, the Bitcoin blockchain in its entirety is a [Merkle DAG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merkle_tree), with every "block" linking to the previous "block", until the genesis which does not contain a link. In addition, each Bitcoin "block" contains within itself a coherent Merkle DAG that links from an 80-byte "header" through to the transactions and transaction witness data. The Bitcoin ecosystem uses the term "block" to refer to a complete data structure that includes this header, transactions and transaction witness data. One of these "blocks" is produced roughly every 5 minutes and appended to the "blockchain".

Reviewer: It's 10 minutes not 5

```suggestion
By definition, the Bitcoin blockchain in its entirety is a [Merkle DAG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merkle_tree), with every "block" linking to the previous "block", until the genesis which does not contain a link. In addition, each Bitcoin "block" contains within itself a coherent Merkle DAG that links from an 80-byte "header" through to the transactions and transaction witness data. The Bitcoin ecosystem uses the term "block" to refer to a complete data structure that includes this header, transactions and transaction witness data. One of these "blocks" is produced roughly every 10 minutes and appended to the "blockchain".
```

Reviewer 2: It's every 10 minutes not 5

This usage of the term "block" does not map directly to the IPLD definition, so this document will add additional clarity when refering to these data structures by referring to them as a **block graph**. This term should be interpreted as consisting of a header, transactions and transaction witness data. The composition of this block graph will be explained below.

### Content digests

The Bitcoin format consistently uses a double-SHA2-256 hash to produce content digests. This algorithm is simply the SHA2-256 digest of a SHA2-256 digest of the raw bytes. These digests are also used publicly when referring to individual transactions and whole block graphs. The Bitcoin Core CLI as well as the many web-based block explorers allow data look-up by these addresses.

> When publishing these addresses, they are typically presented as big-endian in hexadecimal. To represent these in byte form on a little-endian system, they therefore need to be reversed and the hexadecimal decoded.

Reviewer: Since endianness is usually defined over a multibyte integer type, I am for real not sure which type of "little endian" is meant here ( and casual googling doesn't help ). If I see the following 128bit long payload on disk:
- `00 11 22 33 44 55 66 77 88 99 aa bb cc dd ee ff`
What is the actual value:
1. `33 22 11 00 77 66 55 44 bb aa 99 88 ff ee dd cc` 
2. `77 66 55 44 33 22 11 00 ff ee dd cc bb aa 99 88`
3. `ff ee dd cc bb aa 99 88 77 66 55 44 33 22 11 00`
4. Something else? 

Alternatively - if the on-disk structures are explicitly defined over >64bit integer types: this needs to be called out early, so folks like me get in the right mindset.

Author: 3, **as if** you read it entirely as a 32-byte unsigned integer, you read it in the reverse than you would if you treated it as LE. "usually defined over a multibyte integer type" is what's being got at here, but it's 32-bytes, not some repeating sub-pattern.

The "as if" makes me think this is leaning too heavily on the "uint256" thing too much. I'm tempted to remove that language entirely and say it's just a byte string and **by convention** it gets byte-reversed and turned into hexadecimal when presented publicly.

Author: In truth, I never touch this "uint256" thing myself in any of my code. It treat all of these things as byte arrays and then reverse+hexadecimal whenever I need to present the value. Otherwise they're only useful as byte arrays. So I guess that fact in itself suggests the backing out of this concept. It's really just window dressing to make the zeros go at the start of block addresses.

> The Bitcoin format consistently uses a double-SHA2-256 hash to produce content digests. This algorithm is simply the SHA2-256 digest of a SHA2-256 digest of the raw bytes. These digests are also used publicly when referring to individual transactions and whole block graphs. The Bitcoin Core CLI as well as the many web-based block explorers allow data look-up by these addresses.
> 
> When publishing these addresses, they are typically presented as big-endian in hexadecimal. To represent these in byte form on a little-endian system, they therefore need to be reversed and the hexadecimal decoded.

Reviewer: Remove `address` to not confuse with a BTC address ( separate bag of worms )

```suggestion
The Bitcoin format consistently uses a double-SHA2-256 hash to produce content digests. This algorithm is simply the SHA2-256 digest of a SHA2-256 digest of the raw bytes. These digests are also used publicly when referring to individual transactions and whole block graphs. The Bitcoin Core CLI as well as the many web-based block explorers allow data look-up by such content digests.

When show to users such content digests are typically presented as big-endian in hexadecimal. To represent these in byte form on a little-endian system, they therefore need to be reversed and the hexadecimal decoded.
```

When representing Bitcoin block graphs as coherent IPLD DAGs, these trees need to be generated from the leaves to the root. The body of each internal node represents digests (and therefore links) to two other nodes—either leaves or additional internal nodes.

Navigating using IPLD linking from a Bitcoin block graph header to transactions requires traversal via the "transaction Merkle root" through binary Merkle tree to the desired transaction. Navigating to individual transactions without these internal binary Merkle tree nodes is not possible using IPLD's linking system, which is why they must be present in explicit form when viewed with IPLD tooling.

## Bitcoin Block Graph Binary Format

The Bitcoin block graph binary format, available as hexadecimal via the Bitcoin Core CLI using the `getblock <address> 0` command, includes the following elements:

1. Header - the first 80 bytes
2. A list of one or more Transactions - for each Transaction:

>   2.1 A list of one or more Transaction Ins - detailing historical transactions (and a specific Transaction Out) where coins are being transferred from, can be used to derive the wallet to debit

Reviewer: I'd try to avoid using `wallet` throughout this document, as it implies... more than what we are dealing with. Suggested edit ( not sure if the best term )

```suggestion
  2.1 A list of one or more Transaction Ins - detailing historical transactions (and a specific Transaction Out) where coins are being transferred from, can be used to derive the source of funds to debit
```

Author: good point, I've removed all references to "wallet" because tbh I don't fully understand that side of things anyway!

>   2.1 A list of one or more Transaction Ins - detailing historical transactions (and a specific Transaction Out) where coins are being transferred from, can be used to derive the wallet to debit
>   2.2 A list of one or more Transaction Outs - detailing wallets where coins are being transferred (credited) to

Reviewer: Markdown is dumb that way

```suggestion
  2.1. A list of one or more Transaction Ins - detailing historical transactions (and a specific Transaction Out) where coins are being transferred from, can be used to derive the wallet to debit
  2.2. A list of one or more Transaction Outs - detailing wallets where coins are being transferred (credited) to
```

3. Transaction witness data - directly after some transactions, since [BIP141 (SegWit)](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki)

### Header

The first 80 bytes of the raw format contains the Header. The double-SHA2-256 digest of these 80 bytes forms what is commonly known as the "block address" and begins with a number of zeros, which increases over time as mining difficulty increases.

Decorated with links, the basic structure of the Header is as follows:

```ipldsch
type Header struct {
  version Int
  previousblockhash Bytes
  parent &Header # previousblockhash converted to CID with `bitcoin-block` codec
  merkleroot Bytes
  tx &TransactionMerkle # merkleroot converted to CID with `bitcoin-tx` codec

>   time Int

Reviewer: As you note below that's a `Uint32`: do we have a way to express that in `ipldsch` ?

Author: see discussion in #272, these are intended to be adjuncts to the schema when they're important, the schema isn't intended to be a feature-complete description format that can be used for encoders & decoders (maybe one day, but I'm pretty sure Eric will resist that until his death)

  bits Int
  nonce Int
}
```

Decoding the 80 bytes into this structure requires reading the following elements in order:

* `version`: a signed 32-bit integer
* `previousblockhash`: an unsigned 256-bit integer / a 32-byte binary string
* `merkleroot`: an unsigned 256-bit integer / a 32-byte binary string
* `time`: an unsigned 32-bit integer
* `bits`: an unsigned 32-bit integer
* `nonce`: an unsigned 32-bit integer

Once decoded, the Header may be represented in its full porcelain form, as provided by the Bitcoin Core RPC in JSON:

```ipldsch
type Block struct {
  hash String                       # uint256 BE in hex form, the double-SHA2-256 of the block header
  version Int
  versionHex String                 # same as version, but base16
  previousblockhash optional String # uint256 BE in hex form, will not be present for the genesis block
  merkleroot String                 # uint256 BE in hex form
  time Int
  bits Int

>   difficulty Float                  # derived from `bits`

Reviewer: Ugh... didn't we kinda/sorta agree among ourselves that floats are there but **not** to be used, and discouraged at all costs? :)

Author: OK, I need to work on the language around this more, but the lead-in to this particular snippet of Schema says "the Header **may be represented**". There's no binary involved in `difficulty`, it's purely something that's _only_ present in the Data Model, just like `versionHex`. It's also not critical that an implementation of an IPLD Bitcoin codec include this since a consumer could derive it for themselves. I've done it so I can generate almost exactly matching JSON to compare against the Bitcoin Core RPC's output to validate my data.

There's more of this kind of awkwardness coming up, particularly when it comes to script decoding! When it comes to codecs like Bitcoin, what do we present at the Data Model layer? What does it mean to "decode" Bitcoin data? Do we _only_ present exactly what we find in the bytes? Does that mean we leave out the implicit Links (I'm inserting a `tx` CID to link to transactions and leaving `merkleroot` as a byte array, so it's essentially duplicated but not navigable in the raw form)? There's a bunch of different points along the "decode" spectrum that can be chosen and I think I'll have to write that up below and leave it to implementers to decide how far along they go.

I went the whole way with Bitcoin, I can even fully decode scripts into their string form and present them as the Bitcoin Core RPC does, so my decode/encode validation goes both ways and compares against the authoritative and only needs to discount the few chain-contextual pieces of data (`chainwork` etc.). Even as I'm working on Zcash (again), I think there's parts of it where I'm probably going to stop short and shortcut my validation because there's definitely diminishing value as you get into more detail.

* `size` is the total number of bytes needed to represent the binary form of the header plus all of the transactions _with_ witness data, including the bytes used to contain the transaction list (specifically, the leading compact-size varint, see below). These are the exact bytes present when dumping the block graph in hex form from the Bitcoin Core RPC (using the CLI `getblock <hash> 0` command).
* `strippedsize` is `size` where the witness data is not present and the transactions are encoded _as if they were not SegWit_.
* `weight` may be calculated from the `size` and `strippedsize` using the algorithm in [`GetTransactionWeight()`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/7eed413e72a236b6f1475a198f7063fd24929e23/src/consensus/validation.h#L129-L136) function in Bitcoin Core (`(stripped_size * 4) + witness_size` or `(stripped_size * 3) + total_size`).
* Block and transaction identifiers and hashes are always presented in this form as hexadecimal strings representing the big-endian form of the uint256 digests. This means the bytes are reversed from their standard little-endian form.

### Transactions

> There are at least one transaction in a Bitcoin block graph. The first transaction is called the "coinbase" and represents the miner rewards. A block graph may _only_ contain a coinbase or it may also also contain a number of transactions representing the movement of coins between wallets. Each transaction contains a list of one or more "Transaction Ins" and a list of one or more "Transaction Outs" representing the flow of coins. The coinbase contains a single Transaction In containing the block reward and the Transaction Outs list represent the destination of the rewards. Non-coinbase transactions contain Transaction Ins representing the source of the coins being transacted, linking to previous transactions, and a list of Transaction Outs containing the details of the destination wallets.

Reviewer: > There are at least one transaction in a Bitcoin block graph.

Technically, past ~2140, when everyone working on this is dead, this may no longer be true ;P

Author: Do you mean that it's only true if people are transacting on Bitcoin and beyond ~2140 there may no longer be transactions? It's still going to be true as long as someone is mining Bitcoin because there's always a coinbase. There cannot exist a "bitcoin block graph" without at least one transaction!

I'm looking through Zcash right now and it's kind of sad how many coinbase-only transactions there are near the head. It makes it look like it now exists to be mined ...

The block graph encodes the transactions in a sequential list, prefixed by a "compact size" integer. See below for how this variable integer is encoded. This integer dictates the number of transactions to follow.

Each individual transaction can be described with the following IPLD Schema.

```ipldsch
type Transaction struct {
  version Int
  segwit optional Bool (implicit "false")
  vin [TxIn]                       # prefixed by a compact size int
  vout [TxOut]                     # prefixed by a compact size int
  scriptwitness optional [Witness] # same number of elements as `vin`
  locktime Int
}

type TxIn struct {
  prevOut OutPoint
  scriptSig Bytes # unbounded vec<char>
  sequence Int
}

type OutPoint struct {

>   hash Bytes # 256-bits

Reviewer: This, together with the #int64 below, almost makes one want to say "ipld schema integers are of arbitrary precision", and leave it up to the codecs when to switch the wire-representation, **and** leave it to codecs when to use a language internal `bigint` and when to use a native integer.

This has probably been discussed already, so feel free to ignore with no further discussion.

```

Notes:

* Each of the lists are prefixed by their size, using the compact size format (see below). There must be exactly that number of elements in that list.
* Each `vec<char>` is prefixed by its size, using the compact size format. There must be exactly that number of bytes. There may be zero or more bytes in the byte array.

Decoding a Transaction into this structure requires reading the following elements in order:

* `version`: a signed 32-bit integer
* `segwit`: is implicit and `false` for all block graphs prior to the SegWit soft fork, which occurred at a height of 481,824. After this height, the two bytes following `version` are inspected, if they are equal to `[0x0, 0x1]`, the bytes are consumed and `segwit` is `true`. If the bytes are not exactly these values, `segwit` is false, and the two bytes instead form the begining of `vin` (the first byte of `vin` is part of the compact size integer, and as `vin` must contain one or more elements, it cannot be `0x00`, hence the reliability of the `segwit` flag maintaining backward-compatibility).
* `vin`: one or more elements, prefixed by a compact size int, then, for each element up to the size:

>   * `hash`: an unsigned 256-bit integer / a 32-byte binary string, the OutPoint transaction ID hash identifying the source transaction for the coins

Reviewer: This goes together with the endianness discussion above: being an integer and a string at the same time can't be a thing.

Because `merkleroot` in the block graph header only uses `txid`, and a secondary binary Merkle tree uses `hash`, we can see that, when decomposing to content-addressed chunks, a block graph will contain two instances of each transaction that has witness data. The first instance, navigable at the leaves of the `merkleroot` binary Merkle tree, does not contain witness data, even if it is present. The second instance, at the leaves of the secondary binary Merkle tree, either contains witness data, or is identical (has an identical digest) to the first instance of the transaction. So a fully formed block graph, may contain one or two instances of each transaction, and will contain some number of intermediate nodes of a second binary Merkle tree (adjacent leaf transactions that do not contain witness data will result in the secondary binary Merkle containing duplicate portions of the `merkleroot` binary Merkle).

The secondary binary Merkle tree _does not contain the coinbase_ as the coinbase is used to hold the root of this binary Merkle tree. Instead, the first transaction entry (coinbase) is replaced with a "null" hash, i.e. 32-bytes of zeros (`0x00`).

> Continuing the IPLD Schema of the Transaction with `MaybePubKey`, we find that, for a transaction with segregated witness data, _one of the coinbase `vout` elements_ will contain a digest of a **WitnessCommitment** (which we turn into a Link with IPLD). This field is the digest of a nonce and the root of the secondary binary Merkle tree containing the witness data. There is no requirement that a particular `vout` element contain the witness commitment digest, rather, that _one of them_ must contain it. The 32-byte digest is prefixed by 6 special bytes: `{ 0x6a, 0x24, 0xaa, 0x21, 0xa9, 0xed }`, forming a 38-byte field. With this encoding, the `vout` list can be scanned for a 32-byte 

Reviewer: Unfinished sentence

Author: ooops, I think this was an unsaved buffer in my editor, ftr it's:

> With this encoding, the `vout` list can be scanned for a `scriptPubKey` exactly 38-bytes long and prefixed with the 6 special bytes. The remaining 32-bytes are taken as the witness commitment digest.
